## [Chapter 6. Tools and Standards]{.page_break_before}{.center}

### 6.1.	Tools Used 

#### HuggingFace
	
For this project we utilized HuggingFace, which provides open source AI that includes datasets and models which we have utilized in our project. For datasets, we used the Datasets library available through HuggingFace which contains a ‘pubmed’ dataset containing all the Abstracts available on Pubmed. 

#### BioBERT

BioBERT is a pre-trained biomedical language representation model for biomedical text mining. After we complete mining biomedical text, we will use BioBert as a model for Named Entity Recognition (NER) and Relation Extraction (RE) of our dataset. 

#### TigerGraph

Once we finish with extracting the name entity and relationship of genes, we will set up a schema in Tigergraph to generate a knowledge graph for visualization. 

#### The College of Engineering (CoE) High Performance Computing (HPC)

Since the project require a heavy amount of workload, we choose to use the HPC to store all our data and code use to computing an output
	
#### Jupyter Notebooks

We installed Jupyter Notebooks inside our HPC for its graphical user interface. 

#### Python

The language Python is used for implementing our project

### 6.2.	Standards 

[This section describes the standards you used in your project. These standards could be related to hardware/software system and its components, requirements, design, interface, testing, protocols, documentation, and so on.]

Standard 2807-2022 - IEEE Standard for Framework of Knowledge Graphs defines the standard for the framework of a knowledge graph. This includes the conceptualization, construction, and integration of knowledge graphs. https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10017167
